Reference Observations
======================

What was seen in reference footage, what it implies for a scheduled item, and
what it does NOT justify. Reference for this project is Noita gameplay
capture. The snowy-level-crossing stills that used to sit alongside it were
retired by V5 - see notes/art_direction.txt.

THIS FILE IS THE ARTIFACT. THE FRAMES ARE NOT.
----------------------------------------------

Frames live in reference/, which is gitignored. They are large, perishable,
and not ours. What survives a session is the written observation, which is why
this file exists at all -- the same reason PERFORMANCE.md keeps a wrong
prediction next to the number that corrected it. If an observation is worth
acting on it gets written here; if it is not worth writing here it was not
worth the disk.

Extraction, for whoever needs it next (ffmpeg, not currently on PATH):

  stills, one every five seconds:
    ffmpeg -i clip.mp4 -vf fps=1/5 reference/frames/still_%03d.png

  a burst around one event, for reading behaviour rather than look:
    ffmpeg -ss 4:10 -to 4:14 -i clip.mp4 -vf fps=10 reference/burst_x/%03d.png

The burst form is the one that matters for physics. A single frame of an
explosion says nothing; six frames a tenth of a second apart say whether debris
is thrown ballistically, how far it goes, whether it lands as material or
disappears, and whether the light is on the fire or on the terrain around it.


WHAT REFERENCE IS ALLOWED TO DO, AND WHAT IT IS NOT
----------------------------------------------------

ROADMAP.md's Engine & Visual Depth section admits an item on two answers: what
was observed in the built game, and what it makes possible. The first is
explicitly NOT "a feature another game has". Reference footage is exactly that
second thing, so it cannot admit an E item, and the failure mode is cheap to
walk into: watch an hour of capture, come away with eleven engine items, none
of which can name anything wrong with THIS game. That is breadth spending
wearing engine clothes, and reality_check.txt is the note it would be ignoring.

The legitimate use in the E track is the opposite direction. E5a, E6 and E8 are
already admitted on observations from this project. What footage is good for is
answering HOW FAR, HOW FAST, HOW LONG -- numbers those items would otherwise
guess. Reference sets the target for an item that has already earned its place.
It does not create items.

The V track is different and reference is a primary input there, because a look
cannot be derived from your own bugs. V5 is the item that consumes it. The
caveat is craft rather than process: the output is our direction informed by
theirs, not their palette lifted, and V6's locked palette is where that stops
being a good intention and becomes checkable.


ENTRY FORMAT
------------

  DATE / SOURCE
  Seen:      what is actually in the frames, described plainly.
  Implies:   which scheduled item, and what it changes about that item.
  Does not:  what someone might reach for on the strength of this and should
             not, with the reason.

The third line is not filler. It is the one that stops this file becoming a
wish list, and an entry without it has not finished thinking.


OBSERVATIONS
------------

2026-08-03 / resources/video_screenshots/test_location.jpg (Noita, forest
biome, opening area at night)
Seen:      A quantized palette sample (16 levels/channel, ~100k points) came
           back 51.6% flat black and every other bucket in the top twenty
           under RGB 96 on every channel. The foreground terrain is a flat
           black silhouette with a one-to-two-pixel bright rim on its
           top-facing edge and no other texture. Trees are mid-ground,
           rooted at/behind that rim, drawn in flat tone bands rather than
           per-pixel shading. The sky is a banded dusk gradient with sparse
           single-pixel stars. Almost nothing in the frame is textured;
           the read comes from silhouette layering, not detail density.
Implies:   V5 — this is adopted as the forest quantum-world's direction
           (see notes/art_direction.txt). V8 — the layer stack needs a
           mid-ground props layer between the backdrop and the terrain,
           not just backdrop-then-terrain; the original three-layer model
           (backdrop / terrain / props-on-top) doesn't fit this
           reference's depth ordering. V6 — strong evidence for a
           narrow, dark, low-saturation locked palette rather than a wide
           one.
Does not:  License copying any pixel out of the still. resources/ is
           gitignored precisely because this is reference, not material —
           the palette and every generated asset in tools/ are original
           values chosen to the same *character* the sample measured, not
           values read off the file. Does not justify texturing the
           terrain more densely either — the opposite finding is the one
           that survived: leave it flat and let the rim carry it.


WORTH CAPTURING, MAPPED TO ITEMS THAT ARE ALREADY SCHEDULED
------------------------------------------------------------

Not a viewing list to be completed. These are the items whose specification is
currently a guess, so a burst aimed at one of them is worth more than an hour
of general footage.

  E10 powders at rest    - a burst of a pile being disturbed. What angle does a
                           slope hold, and does an avalanche stop or run out.
  E5a velocity           - a burst where material is thrown. How far, how fast,
                           does it bounce, does it land as material or expire.
  E5b air field          - smoke and steam over several seconds. How much do
                           they curl and drift versus rise straight.
  E6  explosions         - radius against falloff, what is destroyed versus
                           what is merely thrown, how heat and light overlap it.
  E7  breadth            - which material interactions are legible to a player
                           on sight, which need to be told to you.
  E8  toppling           - whether pieces actually tip, or whether it reads as
                           break-and-fall, which is what E3 already ships.
  V5  art direction      - the whole point. Palette, contrast, what is readable
                           at a glance against a busy background.
  V7  lighting           - whether fire lights the terrain around it or only
                           glows, and how far the falloff reaches in cells.
  V8  backdrop           - parallax depth, and how much of the frame is not
                           simulated at all.
  V9  effects            - what reads as impact, and how much of it is a
                           particle that expires rather than matter that lands.
